README.md, before:

# 👻 GHOSTY COLLIDER × 🔮 PRECOG PROTOCOL × 🔨 MOLD BREAKER

> **Three executable protocols for creative emergence, strategic foresight, and typicality destruction.**

**👻 GHOSTY COLLIDER** strips concepts down to their deep structure, collides them, and crystallizes things that don't yet exist.

**🔮 PRECOG PROTOCOL** reads scattered signals, reverse-engineers structural shifts, and produces multi-axis timing judgments for strategic action.

**🔨 MOLD BREAKER** takes existing ideas, destroys their typicality bias, and forces them into structurally novel territory.

They work independently. They work even better together.

---

## 💡 Why These Exist

| Problem | What people do | What these protocols do |
|---------|---------------|----------------------|
| "We need new ideas" | Brainstorm within existing frames | **Strip labels first**, then collide deep structures across domains |
| "When should we move?" | Gut feeling + one-axis analysis | **4-axis Timing Grid** with explicit confidence tags and bias elimination |
| "Our ideas are all boring" | Generate more of the same | **Force-discard the obvious 3**, keep only what's structurally novel |
| "Connect the dots" | Pattern matching on surface similarities | **Ghost Extraction** reveals hidden structural resonance between unrelated concepts |

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

### 👻 GHOSTY COLLIDER — "What doesn't exist yet?"

```
1. Collect 3-5 fragments (data, observations, feelings — anything)
   → Pre-flight diversity check: minimum 2 distinct domains
2. Ghost Extraction: Strip labels → describe deep structure
3. Collision Matrix: Score structural resonance (💤 / 🤔 / ⚡)
4. Vision Crystallization: Name what emerges from ⚡ collisions
5. Reality Bridge: MVV + Kill Conditions + First Step
```

📖 [Full Protocol →](./GHOSTY_COLLIDER.md) · [Example →](./examples/game_design_collision.md)

### 🔮 PRECOG PROTOCOL — "When should we move?"

```
1. Signal Map: 3-5 signals with evidence + confidence tags
2. Convergence: Reverse-engineer structural shifts
3. Contrarian View: Challenge the obvious conclusion
4. Timing Grid: Market Phase × Competition × Readiness × External Window
   → Over-determination check: all-aligned = trigger escalated contrarian
5. Action Window: Now / Soon / Watch with specific triggers
```

📖 [Full Protocol →](./PRECOG_PROTOCOL.md) · [Example →](./examples/market_timing_analysis.md)

### 🔨 MOLD BREAKER — "Break the obvious."

```
1. Generate 5 candidates (volume first)
2. Reject the first 3 obvious ones (forced discard with reasons)
3. Select top 2 + Hybrid (keep the structurally novel)
4. Apply 2 orthogonal frames (shift the axis)
5. Add a Killer Constraint (force the final edge)
```

📖 [Full Protocol →](./MOLD_BREAKER.md)

---

## 📚 Academic Foundation

These are not ad-hoc frameworks. They formalize established theories into repeatable, executable protocols:

| Protocol | Theoretical Basis |
|----------|------------------|
| **GHOSTY COLLIDER** | Bisociation (Koestler 1964), Lateral Thinking (de Bono 1967), Geneplore Model (Finke, Ward & Smith 1992) |
| **PRECOG PROTOCOL** | Horizon Scanning (OECD/UNDP), Weak Signals Theory (Ansoff 1975), Scenario Planning (Shell/Wack 1970s) |
| **MOLD BREAKER** | Typicality Bias (Doshi & Hauser 2024), Constraint-based Creativity (Stokes 2005), Structural Analogy (Gick & Holyoak 1983) |

The key contribution is transforming descriptive theories ("how creativity works") into prescriptive protocols ("how to make it happen on demand").

---

## 🔀 When to Use Which

```
You have raw materials (data, experiences, feelings)
  → GHOSTY COLLIDER ("What do you see?")

You have a market/domain question about timing
  → PRECOG PROTOCOL ("When should we move?")

You have ideas but they're all conventional
  → MOLD BREAKER ("Break the mold.")

You have all three needs
  → PRECOG signals become GHOSTY fragments
  → GHOSTY visions go through MOLD BREAKER
  → Sharpened visions feed PRECOG action windows
```

---

## 🧠 Part of HyperAION

These protocols were originally developed as part of **HyperAION**, an AI orchestration framework for knowledge work. They are fully standalone — no dependencies, no external tools required.

---

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions, especially:
- **New examples** — Apply the protocols to your domain and share the results
- **Refinements** — Improve Ghost Extraction techniques, Collision Scoring criteria, or Timing Grid axes
- **Translations** — Help make these protocols accessible in more languages

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](./CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

---

## 📝 Citation

```
Fujiyoshi, S. (2026). GHOSTY COLLIDER, PRECOG PROTOCOL & MOLD BREAKER:
Executable Protocols for Creative Emergence, Strategic Foresight,
and Typicality Destruction. GitHub.
https://github.com/GhostyAI-HA/ghosty-collider
```

---

## ⚖️ License

[CC BY-NC 4.0](./LICENSE) — Use freely. Attribution appreciated.

Commit message:

docs: add Zenodo DOI badge, paper link, BibTeX citation to README

README.md, after:

# 👻 GHOSTY COLLIDER × 🔮 PRECOG PROTOCOL × 🔨 MOLD BREAKER

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.18707858.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18707858)
[![License: CC BY-NC 4.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-CC%20BY--NC%204.0-lightgrey.svg)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)

> **Three executable protocols for creative emergence, strategic foresight, and typicality destruction.**

**👻 GHOSTY COLLIDER** strips concepts down to their deep structure, collides them, and crystallizes things that don't yet exist.

**🔮 PRECOG PROTOCOL** reads scattered signals, reverse-engineers structural shifts, and produces multi-axis timing judgments for strategic action.

**🔨 MOLD BREAKER** takes existing ideas, destroys their typicality bias, and forces them into structurally novel territory.

They work independently. They work even better together.

---

## 💡 Why These Exist

| Problem | What people do | What these protocols do |
|---------|---------------|----------------------|
| "We need new ideas" | Brainstorm within existing frames | **Strip labels first**, then collide deep structures across domains |
| "When should we move?" | Gut feeling + one-axis analysis | **4-axis Timing Grid** with explicit confidence tags and bias elimination |
| "Our ideas are all boring" | Generate more of the same | **Force-discard the obvious 3**, keep only what's structurally novel |
| "Connect the dots" | Pattern matching on surface similarities | **Ghost Extraction** reveals hidden structural resonance between unrelated concepts |

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

### 👻 GHOSTY COLLIDER — "What doesn't exist yet?"

```
1. Collect 3-5 fragments (data, observations, feelings — anything)
   → Pre-flight diversity check: minimum 2 distinct domains
2. Ghost Extraction: Strip labels → describe deep structure
3. Collision Matrix: Score structural resonance (💤 / 🤔 / ⚡)
4. Vision Crystallization: Name what emerges from ⚡ collisions
5. Reality Bridge: MVV + Kill Conditions + First Step
```

📖 [Full Protocol →](./GHOSTY_COLLIDER.md) · [Example →](./examples/game_design_collision.md)

### 🔮 PRECOG PROTOCOL — "When should we move?"

```
1. Signal Map: 3-5 signals with evidence + confidence tags
2. Convergence: Reverse-engineer structural shifts
3. Contrarian View: Challenge the obvious conclusion
4. Timing Grid: Market Phase × Competition × Readiness × External Window
   → Over-determination check: all-aligned = trigger escalated contrarian
5. Action Window: Now / Soon / Watch with specific triggers
```

📖 [Full Protocol →](./PRECOG_PROTOCOL.md) · [Example →](./examples/market_timing_analysis.md)

### 🔨 MOLD BREAKER — "Break the obvious."

```
1. Generate 5 candidates (volume first)
2. Reject the first 3 obvious ones (forced discard with reasons)
3. Select top 2 + Hybrid (keep the structurally novel)
4. Apply 2 orthogonal frames (shift the axis)
5. Add a Killer Constraint (force the final edge)
```

📖 [Full Protocol →](./MOLD_BREAKER.md)

---

## 📚 Academic Foundation

These are not ad-hoc frameworks. They formalize established theories into repeatable, executable protocols:

| Protocol | Theoretical Basis |
|----------|------------------|
| **GHOSTY COLLIDER** | Bisociation (Koestler 1964), Lateral Thinking (de Bono 1967), Geneplore Model (Finke, Ward & Smith 1992) |
| **PRECOG PROTOCOL** | Horizon Scanning (OECD/UNDP), Weak Signals Theory (Ansoff 1975), Scenario Planning (Shell/Wack 1970s) |
| **MOLD BREAKER** | Typicality Bias (Doshi & Hauser 2024), Constraint-based Creativity (Stokes 2005), Structural Analogy (Gick & Holyoak 1983) |

The key contribution is transforming descriptive theories ("how creativity works") into prescriptive protocols ("how to make it happen on demand").

📄 **Paper:** ["From Theory to Protocol: Executable Frameworks for Creative Emergence and Strategic Foresight"](https://zenodo.org/records/18707858) (Fujiyoshi, 2026)

---

## 🔀 When to Use Which

```
You have raw materials (data, experiences, feelings)
  → GHOSTY COLLIDER ("What do you see?")

You have a market/domain question about timing
  → PRECOG PROTOCOL ("When should we move?")

You have ideas but they're all conventional
  → MOLD BREAKER ("Break the mold.")

You have all three needs
  → PRECOG signals become GHOSTY fragments
  → GHOSTY visions go through MOLD BREAKER
  → Sharpened visions feed PRECOG action windows
```

---

## 🧠 Part of HyperAION

These protocols were originally developed as part of **HyperAION**, an AI orchestration framework for knowledge work. They are fully standalone — no dependencies, no external tools required.

---

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions, especially:
- **New examples** — Apply the protocols to your domain and share the results
- **Refinements** — Improve Ghost Extraction techniques, Collision Scoring criteria, or Timing Grid axes
- **Translations** — Help make these protocols accessible in more languages

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](./CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

---

## 📝 Citation

If you use these protocols in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@misc{fujiyoshi2026collider,
  author       = {Fujiyoshi, Shun},
  title        = {From Theory to Protocol: Executable Frameworks for
                  Creative Emergence and Strategic Foresight},
  year         = {2026},
  publisher    = {Zenodo},
  doi          = {10.5281/zenodo.18707858},
  url          = {https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18707858}
}
```

Or in text:

> Fujiyoshi, S. (2026). From Theory to Protocol: Executable Frameworks for Creative Emergence and Strategic Foresight. *Zenodo*. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18707858

---

## ⚖️ License

[CC BY-NC 4.0](./LICENSE) — Use freely. Attribution appreciated.
